Definition Clue

When the definition or explanation of a word or phrase follows it.​

Example: Maya was known by her friends as being very tactful, always courteous and diplomatic with her comments.

Example Clue

When an example of a word or phrase is provided.​

Example: I envy Tonya for being so spontaneous; she always does something fun at the spur of the moment without any planning.

Synonym Clue

When another nearby word or phrase has a similar meaning.​

Example: Finn’s prudent idea about the activity seemed like good words of caution.

Antonym Clue

When another nearby word or phrase has the opposite meaning. Hint: look for transitional words.​

Example: Nadia was reserved when she spoke, but Finn was very talkative.

Read the same excerpt from Rogue Heart. This time, notice the word heavy. Heavy can have multiple meanings depending on how it is used.

First, use your Highlighting tool () to mark context clues that can help you determine the meaning of the word heavy.​

If you listen carefully, you can hear the song of the city. It's in the sharp, raucous laughter of the kids barreling down the crowded streets, in the heavy electronic beats erupting like great beasts from basement clubs, in the wind whistling through dark alleys, and in the rain as it drops on to the city like so many falling stars.

a magnifying glass leaning against a stack of books
Determining Denotative, Connotative, and Figurative Meaning
Words and phrases can have different types of meaning. Readers can use context clues to understand the correct meaning. The first type of meaning we will study is denotative.​

Determining Denotative, Connotative, and Figurative Meaning
Words and phrases can have different types of meaning. Readers can use context clues to understand the correct meaning. The first type of meaning we will study is denotative.​

Denotative meaning is a direct, or explicit, meaning. The denotative meaning is often referred to as the dictionary meaning.​

Think again about the word heavy. Using the Notebook tool (), brainstorm some possible denotative meanings of the word heavy.

One denotative meaning for heavy, as seen in the dictionary, is “having a great weight.”

Remember that words can have more than one denotative meaning. For example, the word heavy can also mean “thick or substantial.” A dictionary is a great resource to help determine the denotative meaning of a word.

There are also words that have similar denotative meanings but have different emotions or ideas associated with them. Next, we’ll consider how the emotions connected to a word affect the word’s meaning.

a dictionary entry of the word “study
Carousel, Previous.
Connotative meaning is the feeling associated with a word. Words can evoke many types of emotional reactions.​

Using the Highlighting tool (), highlight context clues that help you determine the connotative meaning of the word raucous.​

If you listen carefully, you can hear the song of the city. It’s in the sharp, raucous laughter of the kids barreling down the crowded streets, in the heavy electronic beats erupting like great beasts from basement clubs, in the wind whistling through dark alleys, and in the rain as it drops on to the city like so many falling stars.

Looking at the context clues, we see the word sharp and the phrases “kids barreling down,” “beats erupting,” and “giant beasts.”​

These clues provide hints that the word raucous has an undesirable connotation here and expresses a sense of a harsh sound.

Figurative meaning is the nonliteral meaning of a word or phrase. In other words, it’s used in a different way from its normal, everyday usage. We see figurative meanings in literary devices that contain comparisons, such as metaphors, similes, and personification.

Let’s again look at this excerpt from Rogue Heart:​

It’s in the sharp, raucous laughter of the kids barreling down the crowded streets, in the heavy electronic beats erupting like great beasts from basement clubs, in the wind whistling through dark alleys, and in the rain as it drops on to the city like so many falling stars.​

Using the Notebook tool (), answer these questions:​

What is being compared in the underlined phrase?
How does the comparison provide a deeper meaning of the phrase? 
You might have noticed that we’re told the “heavy electronic beats” erupt like “great beasts.” This simile compares beats to beasts, providing a clue that the beats are aggressive and alarming, just like an erupting beast would be aggressive and alarming.

a blurry view of city lights at night through a rainy window
Carousel, Previous.
